---
title: Dirac Equation; Negative Energy
description: The relativistic Dirac equation, and negative energy solutions.
keywords: physics, quantum-mechanics, quantum-field-theory
tags: physics, quantum-mechanics, quantum-field-theory
---

Consider a free particle. Classically, its Hamiltonian is $\Hs = p^2/2m$. Making the operator substitution $p \to P, \Hs \to i\hbar\partial_t$, we get Schrödinger equation. Obviously, this does not take relativistic effects into account, which can become significant in various situations. Thus, we need to derive a new equation with relativity builtin.

### Derivation
We shall proceed with relativity in mind. That is, instead of $\Hs = p^2/2m$, we now have $$\Hs = \sqrt{c^2p^2 + m^2c^4}.$$ To do the operator substitution on this Hamiltonian, we will write $c^2P^2 + m^2c^4$ as a perfect square
$$\begin{align*}
c^2P^2 + m^2c^4 &= (c\pt{\alpha} \cdot \pt{P} + \beta mc^2)^2 = \left(c\sum_{k\in\{x,y,z\}} a_kP_k + \beta mc^2 \right)^2 \\
&= c^2\sum_{k} a_k^2P_k^2 + \beta^2m^2c^4 + [c^2P_xP_y(\alpha_x\alpha_y + \alpha_y\alpha_x) + \cdots] + [mc^3P_x(\alpha_x\beta + \beta\alpha_x) + \cdots].
\end{align*}
$$
Equating coefficients on both sides gives $\alpha_k^2 = \beta^2 = 1$, $j \ne k \implies [\alpha_j,\alpha_k]_{+} = 0$, and $[\alpha_k,\beta]_+ = 0$, where $[A,B]_+ = AB + BA$ is the anticommutator.

It is clear that $\alpha_k$ and $\beta$ are not [c-numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C-number) but q-numbers, i.e. matrices. One set of commonly used matrices that satisfies all the equations is
$$ \pt{\alpha} = \begin{bmatrix}0&\pt{\sigma} \\ \pt{\sigma}&0\end{bmatrix} \quad\text{and}\quad \beta = \begin{bmatrix}I_2&0 \\ 0&-I_2\end{bmatrix}. $$

Now doing the operator substitution, we get the _Dirac equation_:
$$i\hbar\frac{\partial}{\partial t}\ket{\psi} = (c\pt{\alpha}\cdot\pt{P} + \beta mc^2)\ket{\psi}. $$

Since $\alpha_k, \beta \in \mathrm{Mat}(4,4)$, $\psi$ has 4 components, and it is called a _Lorentz spinor_.

#### Example: Hydrogen Fine Structure
Using the classical Hamiltonian for a charge $q$ in magnetic vector potential $\pt{A}$ and scalar potential $\phi$,
$$ \Hs = \sqrt{(\pt{p}-q\pt{A}/c)^2c^2 + m^2c^4} + q\phi, $$
we get
$$ i\hbar\partial_t\psi = \left(c\pt{\alpha}\cdot(\pt{P} - q\pt{A}/c) + \beta mc^2 + q\phi\right)\psi. $$
In studying the hydrogen, we assume $\pt{A} = \pt{0}$ and $q\phi = e\phi = V = -e^2/r$.

Let $\psi = \begin{bmatrix}\chi \\ \Phi\end{bmatrix}$, where $\chi$ and $\Phi$ are 2 component objects. By the equation above, the following coupled relations hold:
$$ (E-V-mc^2)\chi - c\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{P}\Phi = 0;  \quad  (E-V+mc^2)\Phi - c\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{P}\chi = 0. $$
Combining them, we get
$$ (E-V-mc^2)\chi = c\pt{\sigma} \cdot \pt{P} \left(\frac{1}{E-V+mc^2}\right) c\pt{\sigma} \cdot \pt{P}\chi. $$

If we approximate $E-V+mc^2$ to order $(v/c)^2$, we get
$$ \frac{1}{E-V+mc^2} = \frac{1}{2mc^2}\left(1+\frac{E_S-V}{2mc^2}\right)^{-1} \approx \frac{1}{2mc^2} - \frac{E_S-V}{4m^2c^4}. $$
Then we find
$$ E_S\chi = \left(\frac{P^2}{2m} + V - \frac{\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{P}(E_S-V)\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{P}}{4m^2c^2}\right)\chi. $$
To order $(v/c)^2$, we have
$$ (E_S-V)\chi = \frac{P^2}{2m}\chi, $$
and
$$ (E_S-V)\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{P}\chi = \pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{P}(E_S-V)\chi + \pt{\sigma}\cdot[E_S-V,\pt{P}]\chi = (\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{P})\frac{P^2}{2m}\chi + \pt{\sigma}\cdot[\pt{P},V]\chi. $$
Finally,
$$ E_S\chi = \left(\frac{P^2}{2m} + V - \frac{P^4}{8m^3c^2} - \frac{i\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{P} \times [\pt{P},V]}{4m^2c^2} - \frac{\pt{P}\cdot[\pt{P},V]}{4m^2c^2}\right)\chi. $$
We can see that the first two terms are the classical Schrödinger; the third term $-P^4/8m^3c^2$ is the relativistic correction to kinetic energy; and the fourth is [spin-orbit interaction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spin%E2%80%93orbit_interaction):
$$ - \frac{i\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{P} \times [\pt{P},V]}{4m^2c^2} = - \frac{i\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{P} \times [-i\hbar\nabla(-e^2/r)]}{4m^2c^2} = \frac{\hbar e^2}{4m^2c^2r^3} \pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{r}\times\pt{P} = \frac{e^2}{2m^2c^2r^3} \pt{S} \cdot \pt{L}. $$

The fifth term is not suitable for $\chi$. This can be seen from the fact that the fifth term is not Hermitian. The appropriate wave function $\chi_S$ has some of the terms from $\Phi$ leaking in; we will not delve further into this issue here.

### Negative Energy
The Dirac equation seems to describe a single particle. However, combining relativity, which permits pair production with enough energy, and quantum mechanics, which can have large energy fluctuations in a short period of time, we get the possibility that a system with an initial state of $N$ particles will evolve into a state of $M\ne N$ particles later on.

To solve this apparent paradox, We first examine the plane wave solutions $\psi = w(\pt{p})e^{i(\pt{p}\cdot\pt{r} - Et)}$ of the Dirac equation. We get (setting $\hbar = 1$)
$$ Ew = (c\pt{\alpha} \cdot \pt{p} + \beta mc^2)w. $$
Similar to before, we write $w = \begin{bmatrix}\chi \\ \Phi\end{bmatrix}$. Then we have the relations
$$ (E-mc^2)\chi - c\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{p}\Phi = 0; \quad (E+mc^2)\Phi - c\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{p}\chi = 0, $$
$$ \implies \chi = \frac{c\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{p}}{E-mc^2}\Phi; \quad \Phi = \frac{c\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{p}}{E+mc^2}\chi $$
$$ \implies \chi = \frac{(c\pt{\sigma}\cdot\pt{p})^2}{(E-mc^2)(E+mc^2)}\chi \implies \frac{c^2p^2}{E^2-m^2c^4} = 1 $$
$$ \implies E = \pm\sqrt{c^2p^2 + m^2c^4}. $$
Hence we get the negative energy solution, along with the normal positive energy solution. Since there are always perturbations that can make an electron in a positive energy state go to a negative energy state, the negative energy state is not extraneous.

Feynman interpreted the negative-energy states as particles _traveling backward in time_. That is, a positron created at time $d$ and destroyed at time $c$ is in fact _a negative-energy electron created at $c$ and destroyed at $d$_. This way, for an observer traveling forward in time, they would observe at $d$ some negative energy and charge $-e$ being destroyed, or that some positive energy is added to the system and the charge of the system goes up by $e$ (a positron). At $c$ they would observe that a charge $-e$ with some negative energy is created, destroying the positron.
